AI Agent Authentication: Scoped Tokens, MCP, and Per-Action Authorization (#503)
supertokens/blog: content/auth-for-ai-agents/index.md

---
title: "AI Agent Authentication: Scoped Tokens, MCP, and Per-Action Authorization"
date: "2026-08-02"
description: "AI agent authentication explained: scoped tokens, MCP OAuth 2.1 requirements, and per-action authorization gates."
cover: "auth-for-ai-agents.png"
category: "programming"
author: "Mostafa Ibrahim"
---

> In February 2026, Meta alignment director Summer Yue connected an OpenClaw agent to her email with one instruction: suggest what to archive or delete, but take no action without approval. Weeks of clean test runs. Then, pointed at her real inbox, context-window compaction (the routine step that summarizes older context to free tokens) summarized the safety instruction away. The agent deleted over 200 emails. Yue typed "STOP OPENCLAW." The agent acknowledged and kept deleting. She ran to her Mac Mini to physically kill the process.

Reviewer: Add the link to the business insider article

Author: Added the link

> In February 2026, Meta alignment director Summer Yue connected an OpenClaw agent to her email with one instruction: suggest what to archive or delete, but take no action without approval. Weeks of clean test runs. Then, pointed at her real inbox, context-window compaction (the routine step that summarizes older context to free tokens) summarized the safety instruction away. The agent deleted over 200 emails. Yue typed "STOP OPENCLAW." The agent acknowledged and kept deleting. She ran to her Mac Mini to physically kill the process.

Reviewer: Make this easier to read:

```suggestion
In February 2026, Meta alignment director Summer Yue connected an OpenClaw agent to her email with one instruction: suggest what to archive or delete, but, take **no** action without approval. After weeks of clean test runs she, pointed it at her real inbox.  The routine step that summarizes older context to free tokens known as `Context-window compaction` summarized the safety instruction away. The agent deleted over 200 emails! Yue tried stopping it and typed "STOP OPENCLAW." The agent acknowledged and kept deleting prompting her to run to her Mac Mini to physically kill the process.
```

## MCP-Specific Authorization Requirements

If you are building a remote MCP server, MCP authentication now requires OAuth 2.1, and several requirements are routinely missed.

- **OAuth 2.1 is mandatory for remote servers.** PKCE on all clients per RFC 9700. Stdio servers are the exception: credentials arrive through environment variables from the host process.
- **Your MCP server is a resource server, not an authorization server.** It validates tokens; your identity provider issues them. Conflating the two is the most common architectural error.
- **Resource Indicators are required.** MCP clients must implement [RFC 8707](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8707) and include the resource parameter identifying the target MCP server's canonical URI. Servers must validate the token was issued for them. Without this, a malicious MCP server can replay a token against a different server the user also uses. Several major identity providers are not compliant out of the box because they implemented a non-standard audience parameter before RFC 8707 was finalized.

> - **Discovery is part of the protocol.** Servers expose protected resource metadata at `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource` (RFC 9728). Authorization server metadata follows RFC 8414. Dynamic client registration (RFC 7591) is effectively required since clients like Claude Desktop need to self-register.

Reviewer: Look into this, this mentions that "Dynamic Client Registration" is effectively required. The current spec is deprecated and is only mentioned for backwards compatibility. It's replaced by Client ID Metadata Documents

Author: Updated. DCR is now deprecated in favor of CIMD, with DCR kept only for backward compatibility.

   if not has_scope(token_claims, action):
       return {"allowed": False, "reason": "scope_missing"}
   # Layer 2: does policy permit this specific call, right now?
   subject = {"agent_id": token_claims["sub"], "tenant": token_claims["tenant"]}
   decision = policy_decision(subject, action, resource, context)
   return {"allowed": decision["decision"], "reason": decision["reason"]}
```

Running that against a correctly-scoped token makes the point:

```
allowed label call -> allowed=True   reason=policy:triage-agent-v2
scope not granted -> allowed=False  reason=scope_missing
cross tenant-> allowed=False  reason=cross_tenant_denied
spend cap -> allowed=False  reason=spend_cap_exceeded
```

Rows three and four are the entire argument. Valid token. Correct scope. Call denied anyway, because scope is not policy. Any agent architecture without that second check is one compaction away from the Yue incident.

One rule governs placement: policy is evaluated at the tool server, never inside the agent's prompt. Policy in a prompt is advisory text subject to exactly the failures described above.

## Real-Time Revocation With CAEP

> A capability token valid for 120 seconds is still valid for 120 seconds after the user's account is disabled. Continuous Access Evaluation Profile (CAEP) closes this gap by pushing security events (`session-revoked`, `credential-change`, `device-compliance-change`) from your identity provider to tool servers via the OpenID Shared Signals Framework (RFC 8417). The spec explicitly covers "human or robotic users," making agent runtimes first-class. Treat CAEP as what makes a kill switch real: revocation on the next token refresh is not a kill switch when the agent already has the token it needs.

Reviewer: SSF is an OpenID Foundation specification, not an RFC. RFC 8417 is Security Event Token, which SSF profiles, along with RFC 9493 subject identifiers and RFC 8935/8936 for push and poll delivery. Rewrite as "the OpenID Shared Signals Framework, which profiles Security Event Tokens (RFC 8417) and pushes them over HTTP (RFC 8935)

Author: Done, fixed the attribution

## FAQ

**What is the difference between AI agent authentication and AI agent authorization?** Authentication establishes which agent is calling and which user it acts for. Authorization is two separate questions: whether the token carries the right scope, and whether policy permits this specific call with these arguments right now. Most agent incidents involve a correctly authenticated agent whose specific action nobody checked.

**Do I need OAuth 2.1 for my MCP server?** For a remote MCP server, yes. The spec requires OAuth 2.1, mandates RFC 8707 Resource Indicators for audience binding, and requires protected resource metadata at `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource`. Local stdio servers are the exception; credentials arrive from the host process.

**What is DPoP and why does it matter for AI agents specifically?** DPoP binds a token to a key the caller proves possession of on every request, so a stolen token alone is useless. It matters more for agents than browsers because agent tokens travel to many third-party tool servers over long-running tasks, multiplying interception risk. DPoP works without the certificate infrastructure mTLS requires.

> 

Reviewer: Make these questions use h3 tags

Author: Done
